Regarding the impact of charge location and charge
density on clay swelling, previously reported results are restricted,
and drawing the exact conclusions is nearly impossible. For exam-
ple, Liu and Lu [36] showed that in large charge density on tetrahe-
dral sheets, clay interlayer experiences more expansion compared
to clay with a high charge density of octahedral sheets. These com-
parisons were conducted for three different water contents. In
comparing the swelling behavior of Otay- montmorillonite (Otay-
Mt), in which concentration of charge is on octahedral sheets with
Wyoming-Mt that has less charge density on octahedral sheets,
Chávez-Páez et al. [38] revealed that interlayer expansion of the
Otay-Mt is lower than Wyoming-Mt. Smith et al. [39] assessed
the effect of octahedral charge density on swelling of Na-Mt, and
they found that more charge density on octahedral sheets results
in higher interlayer expansion. However, Foster [40] reported a
reduction in swelling of Mt as the charge density of octahedral
sheets increases. Seppälä et al. [41] claimed that the smaller the
layer charge, the greater swelling would result. Sun [42] and Great-
house et al. [43] found similar results. Skipper et al. [44] reported
that increasing the tetrahedral charge layer of Na+-Mt leads to
increasing interlayer expansion. Interaction of water with Mt and
beidellite was studied by Teich-McGoldrick et al. [29]. They
showed that in the case of low water content between interlayers,
beidellite, which has a similar structure to illite, expands more
than Mt. However, Mt showed more interlayer expansion at a high
water content. Also, they observed that the beidellite formed the
bilayer hydration state at low water content compared to Mt. More
recently, Li et al. [37] found that clay minerals with different
charge locations and charge densities display divergent swelling
behaviors. They showed that K+ has dual characteristics in which
their behavior as swelling inhibitors relies on the charge location
of clay. However, Ferrage et al. [45] reported that due to the low
hydration of K+ and their perturbable characteristics, they could
act as a clay swelling inhibitor.

Most of the studies related to clay swelling have been focused
on pure clays. In 2018, for the ﬁrst time, the swelling behavior of
mixed-layer clays (MLCs), including I-Mt clays for a wide range
of water concentrations in the presence of Na+ and K+, were inves-
tigated [46]. They showed that the swelling behavior of I-Mt is sig-
niﬁcantly different from pure clay and depends on both clay types
and interlayer cations. More recently, a comprehensive study was
conducted on the swelling behavior of a chlorite-montmorillonite
mixed-layer clay (CH-Mt MLC) as a function of interlayer cation
including Na+, K+, and Cs+ [47].

The fact is that in addition to the pure clays, plenty of MLCs can
be found in various types of sedimentary rocks [48,49]. Among dif-
ferent kinds of MLCs, illite-montmorillonite (I-Mt) is the most
abundant compared to others such as CH-Mt or even illite-
chlorite-montmorillonite (I-CH-Mt). As previously mentioned, var-
ious factors affect the swelling behavior of pure clays. However,
these factors may have different inﬂuences on the swelling behav-
ior of MLCs. In the present study, we focused on I-Mt MLCs. As is
known, both the illite and Mt consist of negatively charged octahe-
dral sheets of alumina (O) and tetrahedral sheets of silica (T). They
are categorized as TOT type clay which means that the octahedral
sheet is located between two tetrahedral sheets. The negative
charge of layers comes from the isomorphic substitution of layers
in which Si+4 is replaced with Al+3 in tetrahedral sheets, and Al3+
in octahedral sheets is substituted with Mg2+. The major difference
between the two mentioned clays is related to the location of iso-
morphic substitution. Most of the charge distribution of illite and
Mt are on the tetrahedral and octahedral sheets, respectively. The
interlayer counterions of Mt can be Na+, Ca2+, and Mg2+, and the

illite is balanced by K+. As previously
negative charge of
mentioned, the nature of these cations also greatly inﬂuences the
swelling of clays. Therefore, the presence of two types of counteri-
ons, in this study Na+ and K+, with various concentrations between
the two different clay sheets makes swelling process analysis more
complex.

Almost all previous investigations of the effects of charge distri-
bution on clay swelling behavior have been limited to pure clay to
date except works by Rahromostaqim and Sahimi [46,47]. How-
ever, no comprehensive research has been conducted on the I-Mt
MLCs with various charge densities and charge locations to know
their effects on swelling behavior. In this work, the impacts of
the surface charge distribution by considering charge density and
charge location on the swelling behavior of K+-illite-Na+-
montmorillonite (K+-I-Na+-Mt) were investigated for a wide range
of water concentrations. Four mixed layers I-Mt clay mineral struc-
tures with different charge densities (i.e., high charge (HC) and low
charge (LC)) were considered. The molecular dynamics (MD) simu-
lation technique has been applied to provide insight into the
effects of the mentioned factors. To better understand the swelling
mechanism, the results obtained from swelling behavior analyses
of the pure Mt and pure illite interlayers are regarded as a refer-
ence for comparison with the other simulated cases.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, we
describe the simulation systems and procedures in Section 2. Then,
the results are presented in Section 3, and the summary of the
paper is drawn in the last section.

2. Methodology

2.1. Model construction

The 2:1 clay mineral models were constructed based on the
pyrophyllite structure with a chemical formula of Al4Si8O20(OH)4.
The lattice parameters of the pyrophyllite unit cell are: a = 5.16 Å,
b = 8.97 Å, and c = 9.37 Å, and a = 91.5°, b = 100.46°, and c = 89.6°
[50]. As is mentioned, Na+-Mt and K+-I were used with different
charge site locations and charge densities on the octahedral and
tetrahedral sheets to assess the swelling behavior of MLCs. The
chemical structure of the clays is characterized by the random iso-
morphic substitution of Al3+ by Mg2+ atoms and Si4+ by Al3+ atoms
in the octahedral and the tetrahedral sheet, respectively. The iso-
morphic substitutions also obey Loewenstein’s rule to avoid two
adjacent substitutions. In the present study, four different types
of mixed layers I-Mt clays were simulated that their chemical com-
positions and a charge per unit cell (uc) of them are shown in
Table1, and the initial structures of the clay mineral layer are
demonstrated in Fig. 1.

The supercell model of constructed I-Mt MLCs includes 4 clay
sheets (two sheets each of illite and Mt), where each layer contains
5  4 unit cells. As an example, for the case of I (HC)-Mt (HC) with
20 unit cells, the model has 20 isomorphous substitutions of Al3+
by Mg2+ in the octahedral sheets of Mt. In the illite clay sheets, 4
Al3+ were replaced with Mg2+ in the octahedral sheet as well as
replacement of 32 Si4+ with Al3+ in the tetrahedral sheet (16 in each
tetrahedral sheet). To balance the generated negative charge of lay-
ers, according to the charge quantity, counterions were added into
the interlayers. Therefore, 10 Na+ and 18 K+ were added between
the interlayer of Mt-Mt and I-I interlayers, while the remaining
cations were distributed between I-Mt clay interlayers.