 Liu and Lu [36] showed that in large charge density on tetrahe-ishly dral sheets, clay interlayer experiences more expansion compared to clay with a high charge density of octahedral sheets . In comparing the swelling behavior of Otay- montmorillonite (Otay-.-Mt), in which concentration of charge is on octahedria sheets with  Interaction of water with Mt and beidellite was studied by Teich-McGoldrick et al.  [29] They showed that in the case of low water content between interlayers, beideellite expands more than Mt . However, Mt showed more interlayer expansion at a high water content .  In 2018, for the ﬁrst time, the swelling behavior of mixed-layer clays (MLCs), including I-Mt clays, was inves-ishly tigated [46] They showed that the swelling . behavior of I-mt is sig-                 niﬁcantly different from pure clay and depends on both clay types and  Both the illite and Mt consist of negatively charged sheets of alumina (O) and tetrahedral sheets of silica (T) They are categorized as TOT type clay which means that the octahedral sheet is located between two tetrahedric sheets . The negative negatively charged charge of layers comes from isomorphic substitution of layers in which Si+4 is replaced with Al  Previous investigations of the effects of charge distri-ishly bution on clay swelling behavior have been limited to pure clay to date except works by Rahromostaqim and Sahimi [46,47].  The 2:1 clay mineral models were constructed based on the pyrophyllite structure with a chemical formula of Al4Si8O20(OH)4 . Na+-Mt and K+-I were used with different charge sites and charge densities on the octahedral and tetrahedral sheets to assess the swelling behavior of MLCs .  The supercell model of constructed I-Mt MLCs includes 4 clay-like sheets (two sheets each of illite and Mt), where each layer contains 5                  4 unit cells . To balance the generated negative charge of lay-goers, counterions were added into the interlayers . 10 Na+ and 18 K+ were added between the interlayer of Mt-