 Publication: Journal of Molecular Liquids 335 (2021) 116188 . Effects of layer-charge distribution on swelling behavior of mixed-layer illite-montmorillonite clays: A molecular dynamics simulation study .  About 30 percent of all clays are a pure type, and virtually 70 percent are the mixed-layer one that swelling mechanism is still elusive . Almost all previous experimental and simulation studies focused on the understanding of the swelling behavior of pure clays .  Clays are characterized by a large surface area, strong adsorption capacity, and high swelling capacity . The swelling behavior of clays is of importance in the oil and gas industry, as clays in various types are found in geological formation as well as drilling ﬂuids . Water interactions as a base of major water interactions with clayey formations can cause swelling, which can cause wellbore instability .  Osmotic swelling occurs due to an increase in interlayer water-consuming intake from an aqueous solution that culminates in an interlayer expanding from 20 to 130 Å [25,27,28] Factors related to the clay such as charge site loca-centric and charge density can affect clay swelling . The swelling properties of clay minerals are not the same in which Na+-montmorillonite (Na+-Mt) tends to swell easily from monolayer hydration state to osmotic swell, while K+-illite (K+-I) has less tendency to swell .  Most of the studies related to clay swelling have been focused on pure clays . In 2018, the swelling behavior of mixed-layer clays, including I-Mt clays for a wide range of water concentrations in the presence of Na+ and K+, were inves-idated tigated [46].  The swelling behavior of a chlorite-montmorillonite mixed-layer clay (CH-Mt MLC) is a function of interlayer cations including Na+ K+ and Cs+ [47] In addition to the pure clays, plenty of MLCs can be found in various types of sedimentary rocks .  Four mixed layers of I-Mt clay mineral mineral were studied for a wide range of water concentrations . The molecular dynamics (MD) simu-idated lation technique has been applied to provide insight into the effects of the mentioned factors . The 2:1 clay mineral models were constructed based on the pyrophyllite structure with a chemical formula of Al4Si8O20(OH)4 .  Na+-Mt and K+-I were used with different. place locations and charge densities on the octahedral and.ggie tetrahedral sheets to assess the swelling behavior of MLCs . The chemical structure of the clays is characterized by the random . morphic substitution of Al3+ by Mg2+ atoms and Si4+ by Al3+.  To generate the molecular structure of MLCs, CLAYFF was used in combination with the ﬂexible point-like charge (SPC) model for modeling the interlayer water molecules . In each simulation, the systems were minimized using the steepest descent method .  The supercell structure of MLCs was simulated for 1 to 10 water molecules per unit cell, indicating monolayer the (1 W) and bilayer (2 W) hydration status of the supercell . In general, 44 cases of supercell supercells were found in 44 cases . Two middle layers are Mt and top and bottom layers are illite Si4+. Al3+ Al3+. Mg2+ K+. Na+ and H+ are colored as yellow, green, blue, red, and white .  The MLCs crystalline swelling process was characterized by the basal spacing d-value, deﬁning as the distance between tops of two consecutive clay sheets . In all simulations, water molecules were randomly distributed in the interlayers after the distribution of counterions in the middle .  Fig. 3a-d shows the group based on the absolute basal spacing . of interlayers for four distinct systems . Mt-Mt interlayer swelled the most compared to the other systems .  The order of swelling in the symmetric Mt-Mt inter-ggie layer was higher than other interlayers in all simulated MLCs . The lower the lower the hydration enthalpy of cations, the less interlayer swelling will be the result . The main negative charge of Mt clay sheets was due to octahedral substitu-idated Substations of Al3+ with Mg2+ .  We assessed the effect of charge amounts on the swelling behavior of the Mt- and I-I interlayers’ swelling behavior . At both high water contents, the highly charged Mt clay sheet swelled more compared to the slightly charged one . This is mainly due to the weak counterion-clay surface interactions and high hydration enthalpy of Na+.  The presence of K+ as a low hydration counterion between the I-I interlayer region led to tonically swelling of the clay . The more K+ in the inter-gui layer, the more smoothly changes happened while clay swelling .  The swelling behavior of the I-Mt clay interlayer was reasonably independent of charge amounts of the Mt, which is octahedrally charged . (i) In more detail, the lower charge of illite had high charge den-ulent sity on the tetrahedral sheet was the major reason for the lower-charged expansion of the interlayer in comparison with the low-charged one .  The swelling behavior of a system including a high charge illite sheet, regardless of the charge amounts of Mt, was similar to the I-centric Mt clay interlayer . The reasons behind such behavior of I-Mt clay are related to the identity of the interlayer’s counterions . The possibility of their hydration is reduced, especially for Na+.  The distribution of interlayer cations and water molecules in I-Mt clay interlayers were quantiﬁed by the one-dimension atomic density pro-density pro-β-β for 1 W and 2 W hydrate states and are illustrated in Figs.  6–8.  Comparison of the atomic density . of simulated systems give a better insight into the effect of charge locations and charge density on the interactions of counterions with the clay surface .