 Publication: Journal of Molecular Liquids 335 (2021) 116188 . Effects of layer-charge distribution on swelling behavior of mixed-layer illite-montmorillonite clays: A molecular dynamics simulation study .  About 30 percent of all clays are a pure type, and virtually 70 percent are the mixed-layer one that swelling mechanism is still elusive . Almost all previous experimental and simulation studies focused on the understanding of the swelling behavior of pure clays .  Clays are characterized by a large surface area, strong adsorption capacity, and high swelling capacity . The swelling behavior of clays is of importance in the oil and gas industry, as clays in various types are found in geological formation as well as drilling ﬂuids . Water interactions as a base of major water interactions with clayey formations can cause swelling, which can cause wellbore instability .  Osmotic swelling occurs due to an increase in interlayer water-consuming intake from an aqueous solution that culminates in an interlayer expanding from 20 to 130 Å [25,27,28] Factors related to the clay such as charge site loca-centric and charge density can affect clay swelling . The swelling properties of clay minerals are not the same in which Na+-montmorillonite (Na+-Mt) tends to swell easily from monolayer hydration state to osmotic swell, while K+-illite (K+-  Most of the studies related to clay swelling have been focused on pure clays . In 2018, the swelling behavior of mixed-layer clays, including I-Mt clays for a wide range of water concentrations in the presence of Na+ and K+, were inves-idated tigated [46].  The swelling behavior of a chlorite-montmorillonite mixed-layer clay (CH-Mt MLC) is a function of interlayer cations including Na+ K+ and Cs+ [47] In addition to the pure clays, plenty of MLCs can be found in various types of sedimentary rocks .  Four mixed layers of I-Mt clay mineral mineral were studied for a wide range of water concentrations . The molecular dynamics (MD) simu-idated lation technique has been applied to provide insight into the effects of the mentioned factors . The 2:1 clay mineral models were constructed based on the pyrophyllite structure with a chemical formula of Al4Si8O20(OH)4 .  Na+-Mt and K+-I were used with different. place locations and charge densities on the octahedral and.ggie tetrahedral sheets to assess the swelling behavior of MLCs . The chemical structure of the clays is characterized by the random . morphic substitution of Al3+ by Mg2+ atoms and Si4+ by Al3+.  To generate the molecular structure of MLCs, CLAYFF was used in combination with the ﬂexible point-like charge (SPC) model for modeling the interlayer water molecules . In each simulation, the systems were minimized using the steepest descent method .  The supercell structure of MLCs was simulated for 1 to 10 water molecules per unit cell, indicating monolayer the (1 W) and bilayer (2 W) hydration status of the supercell . In general, 44 cases of supercell supercells were found in 44 cases . Two middle layers are Mt and top and bottom layers are illite Si4+. Al3+ Al3+. Mg2+ K+. Na+ and H+ are colored as yellow, green, blue, red, and white .  The MLCs crystalline swelling process was characterized by the basal spacing d-value, deﬁning as the distance between tops of two consecutive clay sheets . In all simulations, water molecules were randomly distributed in the interlayers after the distribution of counterions in the middle .